---
slug: blasphemy-political-use-of-religious-censorship
title: "Blasphemy: political use of religious censorship"
description: "While 2014 saw a fall in the number of journalists being arrested or convicted for covering religious issues, more and more countries are using prohibitions on blasphemy and sacrilege to censor political criticism. Some leaders go so far as to use these prohibitions to pass laws banning any criticism of themselves or their political actions."
lang: en
picture: http://fr.rsf.org/IMG/jpg/blasphemy.jpg
---

In nearly half of the world’s countries, journalists and bloggers constantly face censorship in the name of religions, prophets or God (c’est plus inscrit dans la loi que dans la pratique, la trad deforme un peu). If an article involving religion is deemed to be “insulting” or a violation of “moral standards,” the consequences can be dramatic for the author. In countries where laws are so severe that they may even include the death penalty, news and information providers have had to censor themselves for years.

Sometimes journalists have less to fear from the law than from their more radical compatriots, who may be ready to resort to violence to “render justice” to their religion. The permanent danger hanging over those who cover religious issues has increased the need to alert the international community about the criminalization of certain opinions and the prohibitions on blasphemy, “defamation of religion” and “offending religious feelings” that such bodies as the Organization of Islamic Conference are promoting.

## Heavy sentences

The countries that are most intransigent about blasphemy, including **Saudi Arabia** (164th) and **Iran** (173e) continued to crack down harshly on outspoken journalists and bloggers in 2014. **Raif Badawi**, who founded the _Saudi Liberal Network_ website with lawyer **Souad al-Shammari**, was sentenced on 7 May to [ten years in prison, 1,000 lashes and a fine of 1 million riyals](http://en.rsf.org/arabie-saoudite-court-upholds-10-year-sentence-for-30-09-2014,46894.html) (230,000 euros).

Badawi was accused of creating and moderating a website that insulted religion and religious officials, including the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, and violated the Sharia’s basic rules. Despite an international outcry, he was publicly flogged on 9 January 2015, in what was scheduled to be the first of 20 sessions of 50 lashes.

**Mohammed Al-Ajmi**, a human rights activist and blogger from **Kuwait** (90th) known by the blog name of Abo3asam, was similarly arrested on a [blasphemy charge](http://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-trending-28972617?print=true) on 27 August in connection with a controversial [tweet](https://twitter.com/abo3asam/status/498917225315594240) on 11 August that [accused](http://www.chinatopix.com/articles/8357/20140830/kuwaiti-twitter-star-detained-for-offensive-tweet.htm) members of the Salafist group Al-Jamiya of blindly following its religious leader, Hamad al-Uthman. It was not his first run-in with the authorities. He was previously accused in April of defaming Kuwait’s emir, Sheikh Sabah al-Sabah, before [finally being acquitted](http://www.aljahra.net/?p=3288). And he was also briefly arrested [on 6 July](http://twitmail.com/email/153343094/9/false).

In the **Islamic Republic of Iran** (173rd), one of the ways the regime punishes dissidents is to define political criticism of the country’s leaders and Supreme Leader as sacrilege. [A Tehran revolutionary court sentenced eight netizens](http://en.rsf.org/conservative-courts-sentence-12-03-06-2014,46387.html) on 27 May to a total of 123 years in prison on charges of anti-government propaganda, sacrilege and “insulting the Revolution’s Supreme Leader.”

A young Mauritanian blogger, **Mohamed Cheikh Ould Mohamed**, [was sentenced to death on an apostasy](http://en.rsf.org/mauritania-call-for-young-blogger-s-death-31-12-2014,47435.html) charge on 24 December for criticizing the inequality of the country’s caste system. It was the first death sentence for apostasy in **Mauritania** (55th) since independence. In the offending article, posted on the _Aqlame_ website, he said Mauritania’s social order was as archaic as that prevailing in the Prophet Mohammed’s time.

For this he was accused of making “flippant references to the Prophet,” “violating the divine order” and blasphemy. Apologizing for the post, the blogger denied that he had wanted to attack the Prophet or Islam and said he only wanted to defend the lowly “maalemine” (blacksmith) caste, to which he belongs. Now on death row, he hopes his sentence will be overturned on appeal.

## Violence by “believers”

It is not just authoritarian governments that target journalists and bloggers. Some religious groups also issue violent threats and “sentences,” which their members arbitrarily try to execute to the indifference of the authorities, whose sole concern is restoring order.

Under popular pressure, **Jitendra Prasad Das**, a subeditor with the regional daily _Samaj_ in Cuttack, in **India**’s (136th) eastern state of Odisha ,[ was arrested on a charge of offending religious feelings](http://en.rsf.org/india-publication-of-mohamed-picture-16-01-2014,45734.html) on 15 January, a day after Mohammed’s birthday, when he published a picture of the Prophet accompanied by a short text. His arrest followed attacks on _Samaj_’s offices in Cuttack and other cities in Odisha by members of the Muslim community, who smashed printers and computers in its Balasore office and torched its Rourkela office, although the newspaper published an apology.

In **Bangladesh** (146th) , a previously unknown Islamist group calling itself Ansar al Islam Bangladesh (Defenders of Islam) posted a message online in November claiming three murders, including that of **Rajib Haider**, a blogger whose [throat was cut in February 2013](http://en.rsf.org/bangladesh-well-know-blogger-hacked-to-death-18-02-2013,44093.html), and [naming other future victims, including **Asif Mohiuddin**](http://en.rsf.org/bangladesh-bloggers-on-hit-list-posted-by-19-11-2014,47250.html), a blogger who narrowly survived a January 2013 stabbing that the group also claimed. In his [blog](http://www.somewhereinblog.net/blog/realAsifM) “Almighty only in name, but impotent in reality,” Mohiuddin often expressed scepticism about religion and the teachings of Islam in particular.

## Extending protection of religion in the law

Encouraged by widespread adoption of self-censorship in response to laws severely penalizing any attack on state religion, the authorities in some countries are trying to extend the scope of prohibitions by passing laws under which leaders are regarded as sacred and any criticism of them is therefore forbidden.

This is the case in **Kuwait** (90th), where the government has clamped down on coverage of the emir, Sabah al-Ahmed al-Jabir al-Sabah. After two citizen-journalists, **Badr Al-Rashidi** and **Ourance Al-Rashidi**, [were convicted of insulting him in 2013](http://en.rsf.org/kuwait-emir-pardons-everyone-jailed-for-07-08-2013,45028.html), a draconian bill was unveiled with heavy fines for criticizing the emir or crown prince and sentences of up to 10 years in prison for “insulting God, the Prophets of Islam or the Prophet Mohamed’s wives or companions.” Although it was not adopted, Kuwaiti news providers have little freedom and the use of lèse-majesté charges acts as a major deterrent.

The same trend has been seen in some North African countries such as **Tunisia** (126th), where the [National Constituent Assembly adopted a new constitution in January](http://fr.rsf.org/tunisie-constitution-tunisienne-rsf-16-01-2014,45741.html) that enshrines freedom of information and guarantees respect for freedom of expression. Despite declaring Islam to be a “state religion,” it recognizes the “freedom of belief and thought,” making it impossible to criminalize apostasy. However, although sacrilege cannot be punished by imprisonment, an amendment declares the state to be the “guardian of religion” and “protector of the sacred” and “forbids attacks on what is sacred.”

A “public morality” amendment that can restrict freedom of expression (article 49 of the Tunisian constitution) is also a source of concern. The judicial persecution of **Jabeur Mejri**, a blogger convicted in 2013 in connection with cartoons of the Prophet, shows why such concern is justified. As blasphemy is not a crime, he was charged with offending accepted standards of good behaviour, public decency and propriety. He is still being persecuted by the authorities, who have charged him with embezzlement to keep him in prison.

The same tendency was seen in the [three media reform bills](http://en.rsf.org/maroc-rwb-s-recommendations-on-morocco-s-21-11-2014,47260.html) – on “press and publishing,” the “status of professional journalists” and the “National Press Council” – that Morocco’s communication ministry unveiled in November 2014. While a big improvement on the existing legislation, the reforms fail to dismantle the red lines forbidding criticism of Islam, the king and other members of the royal family, leaving **Morocco** (130th) in violation of article 19 of the [International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CCPR.aspx).

Article 19 says any restriction on freedom of expression must be the subject of a law and must be necessary for the purposes specified in paragraph 3 of the article, which include “protection of national security or of public order, or of public health or morals.” In other words, the authorities must demonstrate that the “restricted”” information threatens national security or satisfies one of the other criteria specified in the Covenant.

In its General Comment No. 34 on the Covenant, the UN Human Rights Committee said that any restriction “must be proportionate to the interest to be protected.” It also said: “Prohibitions of displays of lack of respect for a religion or other belief system, including blasphemy laws, are incompatible with the Covenant except in the specific circumstances envisaged in article 20.” These are war propaganda and “advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence.”
